===
SOP
===

University of Toronto

I would like to pursue research in Computer Science at the University of
Toronto, specializing in algorithms and study of related fields such as the
theory of computation, programming language design and distributed systems.  I
have a keen interest in developing algorithms for modeling and solving real
world problems.

As a PhD student, I would like to embark on a career devoted to the development
of computer science which will involve teaching and research on the development
of better software. My Industry experience and my interests render me perfect
for such a role.

My undergraduate studies were completed at the National Engineering College,
India, in the year 2002. Here, I majored in Computer Science and Engineering
and secured an aggregate of 78% in the University examinations, and was ranked
8th in my class of 60. 

My certificate course in Artificial Intelligence and Cryptography at the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, 2008 provided me with the opportunity to work
on interesting, theoretical problems in Cryptography, and in the study of
mathematics involved in the various cryptographic algorithms. Not only did I
secure excellent grades in the course, but I also developed two player games
using the A* algorithm. 

I also undertook the courses offered by Ars Digita Univ, especially the
algorithms courses offered by Prof. Shai Simonson.  I am inspired by his way of
teaching computer science, which essentially focusses on gaining an insight and
the right intuition for the problem to come up with effective solutions.

As a software engineer in the Computer Industry for 7 years, I have worked on
wide range of projects, in a variety of roles ranging from technical support to
an architect. I have also worked as an independent consultant for companies
assisting in the development of Internal Software Infrastructure.

Over the years, I have developed various automation, simulation, configuration
management, and testing tools utilizing a variety of technologies. I have
mentored and led developers in modern design patterns, implementation,
debugging, documentation, and testing practices. 

Very early in my career, I have veered towards research work and occupied
myself with interesting fundamental problems,  the solutions for which, I have
been able to successfully translate into innovative product implementations.
This is supported by four invention disclosures that have been filed with USPTO
during my employment with Dell India Research and Development Center. I was
awarded "Co-Inventor of the Year 2007" for making significant contributions to
Dell's Patent portfolio.

At Akamai, I have seen good implementations of a standard Computer Science
algorithms and theories in practise. As Akamai was founded by theoretical
computer science experts, I find algorithms like Open Shortest Path First,
cache oblivious algorithms playing an important function in the service
offerings.

The rich repertoire of skills and experience that I have gained as a result of
these experiences would be immensely helpful to me as  a teaching assistant and
research scholar.

I got involved with Python language development through Google Summer of Code
program in 2007. I worked on enhancing the standard library modules. With my
regular contributions, I have become the maintainer for urllib module in Python
language 3. Apart from the technical skills, Python project has taught me the
social skills which are required to work with a diverse group of developers.  I
have been inspired by developers of Python like Guido van Rossum, Martin Von
Lowis and other contributers. I plan to contribute further to the Python
language, in the areas related to Internet modules and interpreter.

I have special interest technologies that are helpful to people with
disabilities. I have helped my friends who are disabled, to use dasher and
voice recognition systems to interact with computers.  I was honored with best
teacher award by Spastics Society of Karnataka, for my volunteer work and
teaching Robotics to the students, in the year 2008.

I known good programmers from University of Toronto through Topcoder
competitions and have also known Prof. Greg Wilson, through his books like
"Beautiful Code" and his writings and snippets in Python. This influenced me
positively to apply to University of Toronto.

I would be dependent on financial aid for my graduate studies, and PhD program
with its research assistance stipend will help to meet financial demands.


---------------------------------------------------------------------


I would like to pursue research in Computer Science at the University of
Toronto, specializing in algorithms and study of related fields such as the
theory of computation, programming language design and distributed systems.  I
have a keen interest in developing algorithms for modeling and solving real
world problems.
As a PhD student, I would like to embark on a career devoted to the development
of computer science which will involve teaching and research on the
development of better software. My Industry experience and my interests render
me perfect for such a role.

My undergraduate studies were completed at the National Engineering College,
India, in the year 2002. Here, I majored in Computer Science and Engineering
and secured an aggregate of 78% in the University examinations, and was ranked
8th in my class of 60. 

My certificate course in Artificial Intelligence and Cryptography at the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, 2008 provided me with the opportunity to work
on interesting, theoretical problems in Cryptography, and in the study of
mathematics involved in the various cryptographic algorithms. Not only did I
secure excellent grades in the course, but I also developed two player games
using the A* algorithm.

As a software engineer in the Computer Industry for 7 years, I have worked on
wide range of projects, in a variety of roles ranging from technical support to
an architect. I have also worked as an independent consultant for companies
assisting in the development of Internal Software Infrastructure.

Over the years, I have developed various automation, simulation, configuration
management, and testing tools utilizing a variety of technologies. I have
mentored and led developers in modern design patterns, implementation,
debugging, documentation, and testing practices. The rich repertoire of skills
and experience that I have gained as a result of these experiences would be
immensely helpful to me as  a teaching assistant and research scholar.

Very early in my career, I have veered towards research work and occupied
myself with interesting fundamental problems,  the solutions for which, I have
been able to successfully translate into innovative product implementations.
This is supported by four invention disclosures that have been filed with USPTO
during my employment with Dell India Research and Development Center.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

University of Toronto

I would like to pursue research in Computer Science at the University of
Toronto, specializing in algorithms and study of related fields such as the
theory of computation, programming language design and distributed systems.  I
have a keen interest in developing algorithms for modeling and solving real
world problems.

As a PhD student, I would like to embark on a career devoted to the development
of computer science which will involve teaching and research on the development
of better software. My Industry experience and my interests render me perfect
for such a role.

My undergraduate studies were completed at the National Engineering College,
India, in the year 2002. Here, I majored in Computer Science and Engineering
and secured an aggregate of 78% in the University examinations, and was ranked
8th in my class of 60. 

My certificate course in Artificial Intelligence and Cryptography at the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, 2008 provided me with the opportunity to work
on interesting, theoretical problems in Cryptography, and in the study of
mathematics involved in the various cryptographic algorithms. Not only did I
secure excellent grades in the course, but I also developed two player games
using the A* algorithm. 

I also undertook the courses offered by Ars Digita Univ, especially the
algorithms courses offered by Prof. Shai Simonson.  I am inspired by his way of
teaching computer science, which essentially focusses on gaining an insight and
the right intuition for the problem to come up with effective solutions.

As a software engineer in the Computer Industry for 7 years, I have worked on
wide range of projects, in a variety of roles ranging from technical support to
an architect. I have also worked as an independent consultant for companies
assisting in the development of Internal Software Infrastructure.

Over the years, I have developed various automation, simulation, configuration
management, and testing tools utilizing a variety of technologies. I have
mentored and led developers in modern design patterns, implementation,
debugging, documentation, and testing practices. 

Very early in my career, I have veered towards research work and occupied
myself with interesting fundamental problems,  the solutions for which, I have
been able to successfully translate into innovative product implementations.
This is supported by four invention disclosures that have been filed with USPTO
during my employment with Dell India Research and Development Center. I was
awarded "Co-Inventor of the Year 2007" for making significant contributions to
Dell's Patent portfolio.

At Akamai, I have seen good implementations of a standard Computer Science
algorithms and theories in practise. As Akamai was founded by theoretical
computer science experts, I find algorithms like Open Shortest Path First,
cache oblivious algorithms playing an important function in the service
offerings.

The rich repertoire of skills and experience that I have gained as a result of
these experiences would be immensely helpful to me as  a teaching assistant and
research scholar.

I got involved with Python language development through Google Summer of Code
program in 2007. I worked on enhancing the standard library modules. With my
regular contributions, I have become the maintainer for urllib module in Python
language 3. Apart from the technical skills, Python project has taught me the
social skills which are required to work with a diverse group of developers.  I
have been inspired by developers of Python like Guido van Rossum, Martin Von
Lowis and other contributers. I plan to contribute further to the Python
language, in the areas related to Internet modules and interpreter.

I have special interest technologies that are helpful to people with
disabilities. I have helped my friends who are disabled, to use dasher and
voice recognition systems to interact with computers.  I was honored with best
teacher award by Spastics Society of Karnataka, for my volunteer work and
teaching Robotics to the students, in the year 2008.

I know good programmers from University of Toronto through Topcoder
competitions and have also known Prof. Greg Wilson, through his books like
"Beautiful Code" and his writings and snippets in Python. This influenced me
positively to apply to University of Toronto.

I would be dependent on financial aid for my graduate studies, and PhD program
with its research assistance stipend will help to meet financial demands. 

I request you to consider my application for admission into a PhD program.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


University of California, Irvine

I am interested in pursuing a MS program in Computer Science specializing in
the fields of Distributed Systems and Networking Programming.

I see MS course as a preparatory step towards a PhD and a research oriented
career wherein, I would like to be devoted to the development of computer
science and enjoy learning and teaching interesting computer science concepts,
and research on the development of better software systems. I believe, my
interests and my Industry experience render me suitable for such a role. 

I have been working as Software Developer in the Computer Industry for 7 years
and I have worked on wide range of projects, in a variety of roles ranging from
technical support to an architect. Over the years, I have developed various
system software tools and solutions using technologies like Python, C and C++.
I have a deep understanding of Python language and in the domain of network
programming.  I have also realized my ability to come out with innovative
solutions to engineering problems. This is supported by the four patents filed
with USTPO for my invention disclosures.

Currently as a Senior Software Engineer at Akamai, I am involved with
designing of a distributed requested handling server, which fetches log data
from Akamai's distributed computing platform and provides it to Map-Reduce
framework for Analysis. At Akamai, I also see the implementation of standard
Computer Science Algorithms and theories in practice. I understand the value of
specialization in computer science education that can help in building
effective solutions.

My interests for research in Computer Science was augmented when I got involved
with Python language development in 2007, through Google Summer of Code. I
started working on standard library modules and with regular contributions, I
have now become the maintainer for urllib module in Python language 3. Working
on a large scale software project like Python has also taught me important
social skills required to work with a diverse group of highly experienced
programmers and researchers. I plan to continue contributing to the python
language through out my graduate studies. I see the potential work in improving
libraries to support IPv6, handling IRI (Internationalized Resource
Identifiers) and also improving the Interpreter core to support concurrency
better. I have presented a numbers papers at various conferences like PyCon,
Scipy in these areas.

I worked as a Software Engineering at Dell India R&D for 6 years. I learnt
important software engineering skills, planning and execution and innards of
system software testing and development at Dell. Through Dell, I have filed Two
patents in Blu-Ray media, One patent in Printer and One software patent in
Systems Management Software. For my contributions to Dell Patent Portfolio, I
was awarded the "Co-Inventor of the year" in the year 2007.

I am involved with Spastics Society of Karnataka for the past 4 years, as I
found that I liked to help people with developmental disabilities and help them
to use computers using assistive technologies. I have researched the use of
various accessibility technologies like voice recognition and helped the
adoption of those with the organization. I was honored as a "Best Teacher" by
School in the year 2009.

My undergraduate studies were completed at the National Engineering College,
India, in the year 2002. Here, I majored in Computer Science and Engineering
and secured an aggregate of 77% in the University examinations, and was ranked
8th in my class of 60. I also undertook part-time courses in Artificial
Intelligence and Cryptography at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore in 2007.

Very early in my career, I turned towards research and occupied myself with
interesting fundamental problems. My project, Uthcode, which I setup to solve
interesting programming problems, has a accumulation of many standard solutions
and more than 10,000 lines of code in C,Python and C++.

Recently, I came across a lot of Python code and articles written by Dr. David
Eppstein, who is a professor at University of California, Irvine.  Reading his
articles, code and knowing about the research work undertaken by him influenced
me positively to apply for Masters Program at your University.

With these interests and skills in my repertoire, I believe, I am  a good
candidate to pursue research oriented programs in your esteemed University.
Please consider my application for a M.S program in Distributed Systems and
Network Programming. 

